Beauty is Basically the Confidence

Beauty is basically the confidence a person has. A lot of people in the world basically look up to beauty as something apparent and physical. This however is a wrong perception. Beauty can be defined into two broad terms mainly the inner beauty and the outer beauty. The outer beauty is usually defined as the physical appearance of a person. The facial features, the physique and the demeanor. The inner beauty however resides inside the person. It is not apparent or cannot be seen. It is something that can only be felt and sensed. The personality of a person and the nature of a person however are termed as the inner beauty. 

Beauty can basically be termed as a specific characteristic of a person or animal or a place. Beauty basically provides a perceptual experience of pleasure as well as satisfaction. An ideal beauty can basically be termed as the one that possesses certain features or attributes that are liked by everyone in the society. As far as the experience of beauty is concerned, it basically revolves around balance and harmony with nature which may ultimately arouse feeling of attraction with others. Beauty however can be termed as a very subjective experience. There is a very famous saying regarding beauty that states that beauty lies in the eyes of the beholder. This saying basically depicts that there are no set rules of beauty. For one person somebody can be the most beautiful person on the planet whereas for someone else that person can be very ordinary and way below their beauty standard. Beauty therefore is not something very specific and varies from the perception of one person to the other. The perception of beauty however is immensely on a very broad horizon. It can be categorized amongst a very complex topic. Every nation or a group has their own defined rules for beauty. An example can be taken from an ethnic group of Africa. According to them, Long necks are an attractive feature. They therefore wear rings around their neck into in order to elongate their necks. Another example can be taken from the country of China. In china narrow feet are considered as a huge beauty symbol. Every society have their own definition of beauty standards. Back in 2008, in the United States of America, men usually preferred having a body which is thinner than the average whereas on the other hand, in the country of Ghana man usually preferred to have a bulky body frame. Beauty therefore is a very subjective experience. 

There are two broad categories of beauty namely the inner beauty and the outer beauty. The outer beauty of a person basically focuses on the physical appearance of the person. The body size of the person, the facial features, the height of a person and the facial features of a person. These all terms basically lie under the category of the outer beauty of a person. The outer beauty of a person is a very superficial aspect. A person should not be judged by the outer beauty. However in America in the past years, racial discrimination was a very common practice. The blacks in America were dark in complexion and there was a perception about dark color as being ugly. The black however were discriminated. They weren’t treated with respect. The whites in the America treated them as inferior to them. They were given the right to work in respectable organizations. This however indicates that the people of America judged people based on their outer beauty and not their inner beauty. The white used to treat them badly just because they used to find the black people ugly and bad looking. This trend however still exists among the people of America. People have started to become extremely outer beauty conscious. There has been a large spread use of technology. People in America undergo various surgeries related to cosmetology treatments. This trend however depicts that with the passing years more and more importance is being given to the outer beauty rather than the inner beauty of the person in America. A lot of new technologies are being introduced in the markets that basically cater towards the enhancement of beauty of people. Botox is one very popular technology that is being used by the people of America. Botox is basically a much purified pertinacious drug that is basically produced from botulin toxin and it is derived from bacterium Clostridium. As this can a very highly poisonous therefore it is used in very small and little quantities in order to remove wrinkles from the outer layer of the face. Botox treatment is getting extremely popular all around the world and specifically in America because people are becoming more and more beauty conscious. 

More and more people are becoming interested in beauty treatments. Surgeries like face lifting and liposuction are being commonly performed by surgeons. With the increase in the awareness of the beauty treatments, people now tend to visit the cosmetology surgeons on daily basis. The outer beauty in America was always given preference. The blacks were always looked down and they weren’t given respect just because the white people used to find them extremely ugly and not good looking. They judged the person based on their superficial beauty only irrespective of how evil or bad the person can be from the inside. A lot of blacks however had to face distressed and depression because of this. This couldn’t help to change their color because this however is a God gifted feature and it is something that cannot be replaced. 

Although the racial discrimination factor has lessened over the time but it hadn’t faded out completely. It is still under practice and will remain in practice. However with the change of time the concepts of the beauty standards have seemed to evolve. A lot of white people now prefer tan skins. They are seen on beaches where they tend to apply tanning lotions in order to tan their skins but they still lay out a lot of importance to the outer beauty.

The exact definition of beauty can be defined as the “quality present in a thing or a person that basically given intense satisfaction and pleasure to the mind of another person.” However if the very same question is asked from a young girl to define beauty she will emphasize on the apparent beauty of the person that is the outer beauty of the person. This is because the media has played a massive role in depicting a distorted image of the actual definition of beauty. The media basically shows women who are extremely attractive, slim and have beautiful facial features. The emphasis laid on the outer beauty of the both men and women by the media has basically aroused a lot of complexes among the younger boys and girls. Girls tend to follow strict diets and tend to do a lot of beauty treatments just in order to look attractive and pretty and to fit in the world. A number of advertisements regarding whitening creaming is shown on the media channels. Another article was published in the newspaper that basically showed the famous singer Rihanna basically showing her workout routine In order to create awareness among the girls in order to attain a flat and much toned behind stomach. There was another advertisement in the newspaper that basically laid ways of enhancing the breasts of girls through certain surgeries.

Media lays great emphasis on the outer beauty of people. The media has distorted the true definition of beauty and has basically been successful in defining beauty from one aspect that is the apparent beauty. Young women have been seen to go out to different and great length to basically follow the unrealistic image of being beautiful. Media has basically managed brainwash the people regarding the outer beauty to such an extent that young girls have seen to develop eating disorder such as anorexia and bulimia. The media projects the aspiring models as extremely skinny and being skinny is defined as a beauty symbol. According to statistics collected, it has been found that one out of every fourth girl has been using very unhealthy methods to loose weight. Some of the unhealthy methods are fasting, skipping meals, excessive exercise, vomiting and laxative usage. Girls and women believe that in order to look beautiful they need to have an extremely skinny and slim body. This is how media has been distorting the image of beauty among the people. A lot of young girls who are unable to fulfill the set of standard of beauty by the media tend to have been found to be taking drugs and other anti-depressants because they find themselves unfit in the world. Some of the girls have even committed suicide because they are unable to escape from being judge by the world. 

Media should play a role in order to focus on the inner beauty rather the outer beauty of the person. People today are entangled in a complex world where they seem to run after things that in actual have no meaning at all. Beauty is something that cannot last forever. There is a time when it is going to decrease gradually and will diminish. It will eventually fade out but instead of adapting unhealthy and unnatural way of looking young and beautiful one should led beauty age gracefully. 

As far as my perceptive for beauty is concerned I believe that inner beauty is the actual beauty. Inner beauty of the person is basically reflected in the personality and the nature of the person. Inner beauty of the person basically depicts how the person is. It is not something that is unnatural or something artificial. It is something that exists in the person naturally and has been refined over the years. The inner beauty is something that cannot be modified using the technologies of today neither it is something that is visible to everyone. The inner beauty of a person resides in itself and the inner beauty is the reality of the person. A person should not be judged on the basis of its outer appearance. Outer beauty is something that is being made my God. It is not in the hands of the person itself therefore nobody should have the right to discriminate the person based on his outer beauty. The outer beauty of the person is basically a God’s creation. If you are judging a person based on his physical appearance or the outer beauty you are basically judging the God’s creation. Moreover the outer beauty is something that is made up and is not something natural. People tend to look beautiful just by wearing makeup and going through surgeries. The inner beauty on the other hand cannot be altered. It is going to be the way the person is. It is something natural and inculcated in the person and no technology or any person in the world can alter it apart from the person itself.

I absolutely resent the society for being so obsessed with how a person looks. I think this is a very naÃ¯ve, immature and a very illogical approach to make a judgment about the person. A person who looks extremely beautiful from the outside does not necessary means that the person is very kind hearted and very sweet in nature. Similarly if a person does not have very attractive features from the outside does not necessary means that the person is not a good person and is evil and has bad intentions. The inner beauty that is the nature of the person basically defines how beautiful a person is. A person who has a good nature and a kind heart is the most beautiful person on this planet from my perspective and this is how it is supposed to be.

If I was offered money to go for a plastic surgery I would surely turn down the offer. The apparent beauty or the outer beauty of the person is something that is being given by God and that is something that we were blessed with when we were born. If we are going to interfere in the way our face has been designed or the way our body is being designed this means that we are basically interfering in the works of God. Moreover if I accept the offer there will be a day when I will want more because I will eventually start to crave changes in myself. There will never be a point when I am going to be satisfied with myself. Therefore the best way is to feel contended the way you look. Instead of investing time, money and efforts on the outer beauty one should invest time to refine the inner beauty. The inner beauty of the person is basically something that is ultimately going to be beneficial for everybody.


Life Is Beautiful

Indeed life isn’t easy but who said it was going to be easy? It’s a road full of ups and downs and as we call it a road, we should know that bumps are bound to be there. For some it’s a little bumpier than others but then that’s called life! However, it’s unfair to complain about things we don’t have or have lost without appreciating all that we got in return but in the hassle of this busy life we all forget to thank the Almighty for whatever he did give us. What I at times find ironic is that we’re too busy to appreciate what we have, yet have ample time to complain about what we don’t have!

Every day I get up early complaining about why do I have early morning classes and why can’t my classes just start at 12 everyday and end in the evening? And then on those days when my classes start in the afternoon and linger on till evening, I find myself whining how the teacher ruined my perfect evening. And it’s not only me, everyone I come across is complaining about one thing or the other.

Jumping out of the bed, I look around and find hundreds of things that could have been better but can’t seem to spot the best items! I open my wardrobe and can’t seem to find something perfect even though it’s overloaded with clothes already! I spend my day cribbing about things, how the teacher took a surprise quiz, gave two assignments at a time which are due tomorrow, gave less marks to me on my project and more to the one who copied off the internet and it goes on! I keep venting out with my friends all day, at times complain to my mom who just keeps saying hmmm hmmm to every problem and then I complain (to myself) how she’s not bothered to solve my issues without thinking how she’s at least giving time to listen to what I have to say. Most parents today don’t even do that! And maybe she’s not intervening to give me more space and make me independent!

While I’m complaining about a hundred things around me, I come across all types of people from all ages and phases of life who aren’t content with what life has given them. Some whine about being fat, while others are wearing full sleeves and layers of clothing to hide themselves because they are anorexic. Some aren’t happy with their short hair, while others complain their long hair are such a mess and difficult to handle and then we find those who grumble about being short while the rest are shy of being tall! And amidst all this, we hear the clichéd statement, “Oh I would be the happiest person alive if I had your hair, figure or height.” And we all know nobody is the happiest person because it’s human nature not to be content with what you have, one keeps asking for more.

The day ends and I tell myself how everything is unfair. I close my eyes hoping tomorrow will be better and it’s the same! Life will continue to be unfair until I change my approach! And then one day I change the way I look at things around me only to realize that everything is just so beautiful! I get up early morning and see the pleasant weather in Islamabad and the sun shining through the clouds, I open my wardrobe and thank Almighty for the extravagant wardrobe that I have and pull out a funky dress to wear. I spend my day appreciating the small blessings in life and realize how a positive approach makes life easier for me! I get done at whatever time and spend time with friends. With them I realize I have people to lean on to, to enjoy with, to laugh with, and to have fun with! Spending time with them relaxes me, I get to be myself without the fear of being judged or criticized. They make me realize how loved I am and how beautiful life is with their presence.

After spending a good time with friends, I rush home! In between if my mom calls to find where I am, instead of cribbing about how she’s always pestering, I feel proud of the fact that I have someone at home, who worries about me till, I get back home safely, who longs to spend time with me, who’s ready to listen to my stories. This thought makes life even more beautiful! Then after giving a short update to my mom, I log on to the internet quickly to catch my best friend online who’s sitting at the other corner of the world, waiting for me to come online everyday and give her an update, which she listens to with keen interest! And if I’m busy and can’t update her, she’ll make sure I do that! In case I start to complain how she’s so far away from me, I stop right there and thank Almighty for the fact that at least she’s with me if not by my side.

Needless to say, a best friend is very important in life. You may have lots of close friends who you can hang out with or call at any hour of the day, but if you don’t have that one best friend who feels the same about you, you will be alone at one point or the other! The reason why they call this relationship, “best friend forever” is because even when you don’t know where you’re going, you know there’s someone with you and you’re not heading alone! They say, love may fade with the season but some friendships are year round. Try to find such friendships that don’t leave you even when your shadow disappears.

All in all, in today’s busy life we are too caught up with things to enjoy the simple pleasures life has to offer, which we fail to notice. Take out time to enjoy the rain and sip a cup of coffee while watching the rain pour down. Watch a small child play, listen to the songs that take you back to the time you first heard them and you will realize what you have been missing on in the hassle of this busy life. Look at the beauty of relationships like friendship and love and stop taking them for granted to find out we are left with a very few to cherish.

We’ve started living in a world where fame, glamour and money means everything and the child inside us is too scared to step out of this world! In times like these you need to step outside and clear your mind and open your heart and think about all what you have! Remind yourself of who you are and where you want to be? What do you really want to have – materialistic things or friendship and love which will last a lifetime? Sometimes you will really have to put an effort to find yourself, but you will eventually!

Stop wasting life complaining and whining about what’s fair and what’s unfair and what went wrong and what you don’t have! Life is too short to spend it like that. Just look at what went right and what’s good around you. Appreciate the nice things around you and realize everyone’s life has ups and downs and bumps, but it’s still beautiful at the end of the day!

Make friends who are true at heart and accept you the way you are, who don’t judge you and who you can be completely at home with. In a life where you can’t choose your family, you can definitely choose your friends so choose them wisely and then you will realize life isn’t that bad at the end of the day. And while you are at it, capture all the beautiful moments in your life in a picture so that you can cherish them forever. Cameras are one of the best inventions, they help us capture moments in the form of pictures that tell us more about ourselves than we know, they take us back to the long journey we have taken, the loved ones we have around and those we have lost on the way! If you can try to bring those loved ones you’ve lost, back in your life and if nature came between you and them then cherish what you have for now.

Life is incomplete without family! No matter how successful you become, how many friends you make, or where you go in life the importance of family remains the same as it was when you were a baby. And as gossip girl says, “when it comes to family, we’re all still children at heart no matter how old we get we always need a place to call home because without the people you love most you can’t help but feel all alone in the world!”


Finding My Voice

I looked up and flinched slightly. There were at least sixty of them, far more than expected. I had thirty weeks to teach them the basics of public speaking. Gritting my teeth, I split my small group of tutors among the crowd and sat down for an impromptu workshop with the eighth graders. They were inexperienced, monotone, and quiet. In other words, they reminded me of myself…

I was born with a speech impediment that weakened my mouth muscles. My speech was garbled and incomprehensible. Understandably, I grew up quiet. I tried my best to blend in and give the impression I was silent by choice. I joined no clubs in primary school, instead preferring isolation. It took six years of tongue twisters and complicated mouth contortions in special education classes for me to produce the forty-four sounds of the English language.

Then, high school came. I was sick of how confining my quiet nature had become. For better or for worse, I decided to finally make my voice heard.

Scanning the school club packet, I searched for my place. Most activities just didn’t feel right. But then, I sat in on a debate team practice and was instantly hooked. I was captivated by how confidently the debaters spoke and how easily they commanded attention. I knew that this was the path forward.

Of course, this was all easier said than done. Whenever it was my turn to debate, I found that I was more of a deer in the headlights than a person enjoying the spotlight. My start was difficult, and I stuttered more than I spoke in those first few weeks. Nonetheless, I began using the same tools as I did when I learned to speak all those years ago: practice and time. I watched the upperclassmen carefully, trying to speak as powerfully as they did. I learned from my opponents and adapted my style through the hundreds of rounds I lost. With discipline, I drilled, repeating a single speech dozens of times until I got it right.

Day by day, I began to stand a little taller and talk a little louder both inside and outside of debate. In a few months, my blood no longer froze when I was called on in class. I found I could finally look other people in the eyes when I talked to them without feeling embarrassed. My posture straightened and I stopped fidgeting around strangers. I began to voice my opinions as opposed to keeping my ideas to myself. As my debate rank increased from the triple to single-digits, so too did my standing at school. I began interacting with my teachers more and leading my peers in clubs. In discussions, I put forward my ideas with every bit as much conviction as my classmates. When seniors began to ask me for advice and teachers recruited me to teach underclassmen, I discovered not only that I had been heard, but that others wanted to listen. At heart, I am still reserved (some things never change), but in finding my voice, I found a strength I could only dream of when I stood in silence so many years ago.

Standing in front of the crowd of students, it was my hope that by founding this program, I could give them an experience that was as empowering as mine had been for me. As the weeks passed, the students inched past their insecurities and towards finding their voices, just as I had always wanted to do. On the last day of class for that year, I looked up and saw each of the students standing confidently, equipped and ready to speak their minds in whatever they wanted to do. They had come a long way from being the shy and stuttering novices that they were just thirty weeks before—I can’t wait to see how far they can go from here.

On Potatoes

“If you had to choose one food to eat for the rest of your life, what would it be?”

Having had this question asked of me many a time, I realize that such an inquiry must be considered practically. The correct answer would keep me happily sustained for the rest of my years, whereas the wrong choice could leave me tormented until I wither away from monotony. If I chose macaroni and cheese, per se, I’d be trapped consuming glutinous pasta, tacky milk-fat, yellow dye No.5, and copious amounts of sodium, forever. But if instead, I call upon my contentment understandings and assess my options accordingly, I may arrive at an indefectible conclusion. And after much deliberation, I believe that I have come to such a response: potatoes.

These tubers are the perfect sustenance due not only to their nutritional qualities but, most notably, to their remarkable versatility. Potatoes may be prepared in a myriad of dishes.

Creamy mashed-potatoes come first to mind, with their fluffy hills of whipped-bliss gracing one’s tongue so delicately. The thought of golden tater-tots follows; deep-fried potatoes cooked perfectly so as to create a slow crunch when chewed. Then are characteristic french-fries—shoestring or steak, skin on or off. Baked-potatoes, latkes, hash-browns, gnocchi—all respectable meals. And one mustn’t forget potato-chips when searching for alight snack.

Oh potatoes, how I love you. And when asked what to eat exclusively for the rest of my life, I will enthusiastically respond “potatoes!”, for by picking one, I choose an abundance.

To a casual onlooker, this question may appear inconsequential in its hypothetical nature, but as they say; you are what you eat. My inclination towards the varied is not contained to my food habits—it is a recurring theme throughout my life. I regularly switch from my mom’s house to my dad’s. I’ve moved twelve times. I have a fifteen-year-old sister and a two-year-old brother. I’m a dog and a cat person.

This variation tends not to leave me with an aversion to commitment, but a disposition towards diversity. I am interested in many things. So one must understand how I have struggled, faced throughout my education with the question, “If you had to choose one subject to study, one occupation to pursue, one thing to do, for the rest of your life, what would it be?”

I love to play viola; I get a rush communicating without-words to my quartet members in order to convey a musical message. I am at my happiest reading a good book; their complex stories captivate me and I aspire to write a novel of my own. I want to make laws that improve my country; all people should have a shot at the American dream. I am passionate about protecting the environment; reducing our effect on global-warming is of the utmost importance to me. I want to help those in need; people still don’t have access to clean water and I want to use my privilege to help change that. I strive to become fluent in Spanish; traveling the world is a dream of mine. Recently, I have discovered that I really like to code; I’m sure in the coming years I will explore things I didn’t know I was interested in.

I don’t have an answer to what exactly it is I want to do for the rest of my life. I love English and political science, but I have yet to find such an all-encompassing response as potatoes. What I’ve realized though, is that I don’t have to sacrifice all for one. From each of my interests I learn things that contribute to who I am and shape how I see the world. Eventually, I will focus my path. And when I do have an answer, I will go forth with the knowledge I’ve gathered from each of my varied interests; and I will never stop learning.

Rock Climbing as a Second Language

There I was, hanging from the precipice, muscles trembling, fingers aching, sweat dripping onto my spotter twenty feet below. He could see I was struggling, and shouted words of encouragement, but my head was pounding too loudly to make out the words. During the initial ascent, I felt strong and confident, though the intense scope of the route had begun to loosen my physical grip, as well as my grip on reality. I made it to the final hold, exhausting every drop of energy, unable to fathom lifting my arm again. The wall then became a towering mental blockade. I knew exactly where to put my hand next, yet I still didn’t feel as if I had the physical means of doing so. I screamed and shot my hand up in a final attempt to finish the climb. I was only hanging on by my fingertips and sheer determination, nevertheless I had made it to the top. My belayer celebrated and lowered me down. Weak and exhausted, I could barely unclip myself from the harness; however, mentally I had never felt stronger.

It is during these experiences that the world falls away; all that is left is the rock face itself. I become one with the wall, solely captivated by the placements of its holds and the complexity of its challenge. Time ceases to exist.

Rock climbing is a second language to me. I grew up scaling the tallest trees I could find, desiring the highest vantage point. Growing up in the uniformly flat state of Florida, I was limited in my upward journey. Luckily, I rekindled my love for climbing in high school, and now cannot imagine life without it. My passion for climbing is fueled by the adrenaline that pumps through my veins.

At first, I was an impatient climber who would try and solve the wall before me, making split-second decisions. However, this strategy rapidly tired me out after beginning to climb. Clearly, this method wasn’t going to get the job done; I had to change my mindset. Now, when I approach a wall, I first draw the problem out in my mind, using my hands to examine the holds. Like a game of chess, I lay out an intricate plan of attack. If I am completely perplexed by a wall, I converse with other pro climbers to guide me towards the best route. Every time I interact with climbers better than myself, I learn a new technique and create new bonds. Being part of the rock climbing community has helped me develop my social skills.

The best things about climbing is that there is no clear-cut way to climb a wall, and that there is always a new challenge. My climbing partners say that I take the most unorthodox routes when climbing, but ironically they’re the most natural and comfortable paths for me. I get lost in the walls and climb for hours, as time becomes irrelevant. I think of nothing else but reaching the last hold and forget all of my worries. Even when my friends beg to go home from fatigue, I insist on attempting another route. I don’t feel I’ve had a sufficient climbing session until my forearms are pulsing and the skin on my fingertips are raw.

Patience, collaboration, and determination are all needed when climbing a wall, like in any field of research. I no longer say I can’t do something, instead approaching challenges with the utmost confidence. If one plan falls short, I reassess and approach the wall from another angle. I am comfortable making decisions, even when I don’t know what the outcome may be. Through this life-changing sport I have strengthened not only my body but also my mind, learning the beauty of problem solving.

Bridging Polarity

“These people are just confused,” Emily whispered to me as she stared out the car window at the gay couples walking down the rainbow streets of the Castro. I was utterly offended by her statement, but I replied calmly, “Let people be who they are.” Emily and I grew up in Texas together as inseparable friends. For twelve years that was our beautiful home, and we enjoyed every moment together. Last summer, Emily visited my new home of five years, San Francisco, for the first time. It felt like no time had passed. We still laughed until our faces turned tomato red. We still screamed our favorite Taylor Swift songs as if there was no tomorrow. Nothing could get in between the love we had for each other, even our vehemently opposing opinions.

Emily’s visit sparked a period of growth in which I improved respecting values of those with an opposite viewpoint. That challenge especially reflects the stagnant state of the current political climate in the United States. Extreme polarization is preventing collaboration that could resolve any issues. Even in my daily experiences, I notice the extreme dichotomy. My friends in California stereotype my friends in Texas. My friends in Texas stereotype my friends in California. During debates in history class or jokes during lunch, I observe that these toxic assumptions produce an atmosphere of mistrust. I find that abhorrence exhausting, especially considering that I experienced the beauty on both sides beneath the stereotypes. Disagreement between opposing perspectives is healthy in creating a functioning balance. However, when the fine line between argument and hatred blurs, resolution seems impossible.

So, I try to listen with an open mind, even when that feels extremely difficult. Sometimes, pure adrenaline rushes through my body, making me want to bang my hands on the table out of complete anger towards an opinion. I have learned, though, that suppressing my emotional side during a time of disagreement and instead responding with calmness gets my point across more effectively. When that irritation begins to overtake my ability to concentrate on another person’s outlook, I always try to draw from my experiences of living both in the South and in the West. People come from different backgrounds. They are surrounded by different cultures and experiences. I don’t necessarily have to find validity in everyone’s viewpoints to at least listen to their reasoning.

The more I remain nonjudgmental, the more my own beliefs develop and become nuanced. I have nothing to lose when I listen to my peers. I extract small pieces of their perspectives in order to enhance my own. If I completely disagree with their opinions, I use their counterargument to articulate a more potent version of my position. The value in telling my story is just as important as hearing another. I love group projects in school, where ideas and creativity flow between people. I adore the end of a cross country race when all the girls from different schools hug and laugh with one another. I cherish being on a soccer team, where the bond between my teammates and me is essential for achieving success. Appreciating uniqueness and connecting to different characters augments my own maturity and depth. I want to meet new people. I want to be challenged by new ideas. I want to experience new places. Despite our differences, Emily and I have a healthy relationship in which we are able to learn from one another; the acknowledgement of our individual value allows us to avoid bitterness. I strive to continue improving my ability to be comfortable with disagreement in order to learn more from my peers. I may not always send up agreeing with Emily, or other people I care about, but I should at least try to understand a different perspective. Only then can I create a bridge that connects two different ideas, allowing for a more harmonious world.

Facing the Hot Griddle

Standing in front of the kitchen counter, my small hands are placed on the cool granite top and my eyes rest on the empty bowl set out in front of me. On one side lies a pack of masa harina and on the other, a pitcher filled with water. Tortillas are considered to be somewhat of a staple food in Guatemala and in Central American cuisines. Whenever my mom asks me to make tortillas, I groan internally; not because I dislike tortillas, but because I simply cannot make them. What should come naturally as a Guatemalan native is foreign to my small hands. My hands are unable to form the perfectly sized circles because they are trying to decide what dominates more—my Guatemalan roots or the American culture I grew up in.

Minutes pass and I have done absolutely nothing. Finally, I extend my hesitant arm to pick up the pack of masa harina and proceed to pour it into the bowl. As I pour the masa harina, I cannot help but think about how much it resembles my journey to America. When I moved, I brought my Guatemalan heritage with me into the massive bowl that is the United States. Continuing with the recipe, I gradually add water to the masa harina and knead it until it becomes the desired texture. Assimilating into American culture and the American way of life was no easy feat for me and I struggled at first, but I found ways to manage. Although my parents were not fluent in English, I was able to learn English with the help of Dora the Explorer, Barney, and my surroundings. Little by little, American culture poured into my life, intermingling with my Guatemalan roots.

My next step is to grab a small amount of masa in my hands and begin to roll it into as much of a perfectly shaped sphere as I can. Flattening the ball of masa between my hands, I begin to shape it into a tortilla. Similar to how I have a preconceived notion of how I want the tortilla to turn out, I tend to idealize how I want my life to turn out. Regardless of my efforts, I can’t help it if my tortilla tears as I attempt to shape it. Just like the cracks and tears in my tortilla, I face obstacles in life. However, I have learned to not let them bring me down or keep me from continuing to try. For instance, I come from a low socioeconomic background, but I have never let that stop me from pursuing my aspirations. It is not just about the tortilla that I am making right in front of me. It is about me, my life, and what kind of tortilla I will end up being. Will I be a tortilla that looks like every other one? Or will I be a tortilla, uniquely made in the most perfect imperfect shape?

Despite my many failed attempts at making tortillas throughout my life, I have discovered the key ingredient to the tortilla recipe, and ultimately the recipe of life: persistence. If trying to make tortillas has taught me anything, it is that: it’s not about the shape of the tortilla, it’s about how the tortilla faces the hot griddle of life.

The Mechanisms of Collaboration

Ever since the first grade, Dmitri Mendeleev has been my hero. When I first saw the periodic table, I was in awe; the colors, the patterns, the symmetric shape—everything mesmerized me. Ever since that moment, the periodic table has defined the way I live. Just as Mendeleev put together a seemingly random assortment of elements to form the now infamous periodic table, I loved putting together the seemingly random jumble of words and numbers in word problems to formulate a solution.

Math has always been a channel for my creativity and passion. In fact, it was through math that I first unearthed my love of discovery. I still vividly remember the rush of joy that I felt when I finished struggling through my first word problem and triumphantly waved it around in the air. As I progressed further and further up the insurmountable mountain of math and began to encounter more foreign concepts, it only got more interesting. No longer was I in a world saturated with numbers; instead, letters and symbols began to enter the mix too. My
curiosity was insatiable. And then, I picked up my first calculus textbook. While many remember this moment as one of severe anxiety or trepidation, I remember looking at the strange, archaic symbols, bewildered, thinking where did the numbers go? Because this was in third grade, I didn’t fully understand the intricacies behind the mathematical notation. Nonetheless, it was at that point that I decided to pursue mathematics.

But, the more I researched, the more questions I had. As I dug deeper into the inviting, yet mysterious abyss of number theory, I saw math morph into shapes and patterns and I came to the realization that math is more than numbers; mathematics represents a field of patterns, representations, models that lay the foundation for the way our universe works. That’s when it dawned on me: I loved math for the same reason I loved the periodic table. The rush of discovery, the love of patterns, the joy of exploration—everything was the same. As I explored my love for math further, I began to realize that the joy that I experienced when discovering something new was not only because of that “Eureka!” moment; rather, it was utilizing the tools that mathematics provided to apply the intangible concepts so prevalent in textbooks to the world that surrounds us.

The duality of the periodic table—the cold, hard numbers mixed with the reassuring, steadfast patterns—has manifested itself in every aspect of my life. While the patterns of the periodic table drew me towards mathematics, it was the systematic, ordered way of bringing math into science that pulled me into coding, first making websites with HTML, then writing programs with Java. My passion for programming grew. The world of coding presented itself to me as a way to bring the patterns I loved into the world in a way I could see them.

But something was still missing. After years of refining my analytical interests, I still yearned for that element of science that I had grown to love as a first grader. I was still missing that feeling of success after persevering through a difficult word problem or struggling through memorizing the first 100 digits of pi. It was then that I discovered biology. As I explored various research studies that not only furthered scientific understanding but also helped millions around the world, I knew that this was what I wanted to do. Medical research, specifically in cellular biology and genetics, condenses my passion for mathematics, biology, and discovery into one distinct goal. Whether it be analyzing patterns in the genome, generating computer models of clathrin-mediated endocytosis, or studying the chemical composition of organic molecules, cellular biology embodies my passions just as well as the periodic table.

Time to Spin the Wheel

For as long as I can remember, one of my favorite pastimes has been manipulating those tricky permutations of 26 letters to fill in that signature, bright green gridded board of Wheel of Fortune.

Every evening at precisely 6:30 p.m., my family and I unfailingly gather in our living room in anticipation of Pat Sajak’s cheerful announcement: “It’s time to spin the wheel!” And the game is afoot, our banter punctuated by the potential of either big rewards or even bigger bankruptcies: “She has to know that word—my goodness, why is she buying a vowel?!”

While a game like Wheel of Fortune is full of financial pitfalls, I wasn’t ever much interested in the money or new cars to be won. I found myself drawn to the letters and playful application of the English alphabet, the intricate units of language.

For instance, phrases like “I love you,” whose incredible emotion is quantized to a mere set of eight letters, never cease to amaze me. Whether it’s the definitive pang of a simple “I am” or an existential crisis posed by “Am I”, I recognized at a young age how letters and their order impact language.

Spelling bees were always my forte. I’ve always been able to visualize words and then verbally string individual consonants and vowels together. I may not have known the meaning of every word I spelled, I knew that soliloquy always pushed my buttons: that -quy ending was so bizarre yet memorable! And intaglio with its silent “g” just rolled off the tongue like cultured butter.

Eventually, letters assembled into greater and more complex words.

I was an avid reader early on, devouring book after book. From the Magic Treehouse series to the too real 1984, the distressing The Bell Jar, and Tagore’s quaint short stories, I accumulated an ocean of new words, some real (epitome, effervescence, apricity), and others fully fictitious (doubleplusgood), and collected all my favorites in a little journal, my Panoply of Words.

Add the fact that I was raised in a Bengali household and studied Spanish in high school for four years, and I was able to add other exotic words. Sinfin, zanahoria, katukutu, and churanto soon took their rightful places alongside my English favorites.

And yet, during this time of vocabulary enrichment, I never thought that Honors English and Biology had much in common. Imagine my surprise one night as a freshman as I was nonchalantly flipping through a science textbook. I came upon fascinating new terms: adiabatic, axiom, cotyledon, phalanges…and I couldn’t help but wonder why these non-literary, seemingly random words were drawing me in. These words had sharp syllables, were challenging to enunciate, and didn’t possess any particularly abstract meaning.

I was flummoxed, but curious…I kept reading.

“Air in engine quickly compressing…”

“Incontestable mathematical truth…”

“Fledgling leaf in an angiosperm…”

“Ossified bones of fingers and toes…

…and then it hit me. For all my interest in STEM classes, I never fully embraced the beauty of technical language, that words have the power to simultaneously communicate infinite ideas and sensations AND intricate relationships and complex processes.

Perhaps that’s why my love of words has led me to a calling in science, an opportunity to better understand the parts that allow the world to function. At day’s end, it’s language that is perhaps the most important tool in scientific education, enabling us all to communicate new findings in a comprehensible manner, whether it be focused on minute atoms or vast galaxies.

It’s equal parts humbling and enthralling to think that I, Romila, might still have something to add to that scientific glossary, a little permutation of my own that may transcend some aspect of human understanding. Who knows, but I’m definitely game to give the wheel a spin, Pat, and see where it takes me…

And on That Note

The sound was loud and discordant, like a hurricane, high notes and low notes mixing together in an audible mess. It was as if a thousand booming foghorns were in a shouting match with sirens. Unlike me, this was a little abrasive and loud. I liked it. It was completely unexpected and extremely fun to play.

Some instruments are built to make multiple notes, like a piano. A saxophone on the other hand doesn’t play chords but single notes through one vibrating reed. However, I discovered that you can play multiple notes simultaneously on the saxophone. While practicing a concert D-flat scale, I messed up a fingering for a low B-flat, and my instrument produced a strange noise with two notes. My band teacher got very excited and exclaimed, “Hey, you just played a polyphonic note!” I like it when accidents lead to discovering new ideas.

I like this polyphonic sound because it reminds me of myself: many things at once. You assume one thing and get another. At school, I am a course scholar in English, but I am also able to amuse others when I come up with wince evoking puns. My math and science teachers expect me to go into engineering, but I’m more excited about making films. Discussing current events with my friends is fun, but I also like to share with them my secrets to cooking a good scotch egg. Even though my last name gives them a hint, the Asian students at our school don’t believe that I’m half Japanese. Meanwhile the non-Asians are surprised that I’m also part Welsh. I feel comfortable being unique or thinking differently. As a Student Ambassador this enables me to help freshman and others who are new to our school feel welcome and accepted. I help the new students know that it’s okay to be themselves.

There is added value in mixing things together. I realized this when my brother and I won an international Kavli Science Foundation contest where we explained the math behind the Pixar movie “Up”. Using stop motion animation we explored the plausibility and science behind lifting a house with helium balloons. I like offering a new view and expanding the way people see things. In many of my videos I combine art with education. I want to continue making films that not only entertain, but also make you think.

A lot of people have a single passion that defines them or have a natural talent for something specific. Like my saxophone I am an instrument, but I can play many notes at once. I’m a scholar and a musician. Quiet but talkative. An athlete and a filmmaker. Careful but spontaneous. A fan of Johnny Cash and Kill The Noise. Hard working but playful. A martial artist and a baker. One of a kind but an identical twin.

Will polyphonic notes resonate in college? Yes. For instance, balancing a creative narrative with scientific facts will make a more believable story. I want to bring together different kinds of students (such as music, film, and English majors) to create more meaningful art. Understanding fellow students’ perspective, talents, and ideas are what build a great community.

I’m looking forward to discovering my place in the world by combining various interests. Who I am doesn’t always harmonize and may seem like nothing but noise to some. But what I play, no matter how discordant, can be beautiful. It’s my own unique polyphonic note.

Learning How to Play

The first board game I ever played was Disney Princess Monopoly against my mother. It was a shocking experience. My otherwise loving and compassionate mother played to win. Though she patiently explained her strategies throughout the game, she refused to show me any mercy, accumulating one monopoly after another, building house after house, hotel after hotel, and collecting all my money until I was bankrupt, despite my pleas and tears that I was her daughter and only five years old. I remember clearly the pain I felt from losing, but I remained eager to play and determined to one day beat her. Eventually, we left the princesses behind and graduated to the regular, then the deluxe, editions of Monopoly, and expanded to Rummikub. Every time we played, I carefully observed my mother’s moves and habits while considering my own options. Over the years, she continued to beat me in both games, but the contests became more competitive and my losses more narrow. Finally, at twelve, I won for the first time, at Rummikub no less, a game at which she claimed to be undefeated! I felt an overwhelming sense of pride, which was only magnified when I saw the same emotion in my mother’s face.

I learned so much from these games beyond the obvious. I learned how to lose, and win, graciously. I learned to enjoy the process, regardless of the outcome. I learned how to take cues from other people but think on my own, both creatively and strategically. I learned how to cope with failure and turn it into a lesson. I learned that true victory stems from hard work and persistence. And I learned that the strongest and most meaningful relationships are not based on indulgence but on honesty and respect.

This doesn’t mean that losses don’t sting. I was devastated when my hockey team lost the championship game by only one goal when I was the last one to control the puck. But I was still incredibly proud of my team’s cohesiveness, the fluid effort we put into the season, and my own contribution. More importantly, the camaraderie and support of my teammates is ongoing and something I will always cherish more than a win. I didn’t dwell over what could have been. Instead, I focused on what I was going to take with me into the next season.

This past summer, I had my first substantive work experience interning at the Michael J. Fox Foundation for Parkinson’s Research, researching and writing about treatments and therapies. Working there was certainly not a game, but my strategy was the same: work hard, remain focused, be mindful and respectful of those around me, deal with the inevitable curveballs, and take constructive criticism to heart, all in pursuit of a meaningful goal. At first, I found it intimidating, but I quickly found my footing. I worked hard, knowing that what I took away from the experience would be measured by what I put into it. I studied my co-workers: how they conducted themselves, how they interacted with each other, and how they approached their respective jobs. I carefully reviewed redlines on my writing assignments, tried not to get discouraged, and responded to the comments to present the material more effectively. I absorbed the stories relayed by Parkinson’s patients regarding their struggles and was amazed at how empowered they felt by their participation in clinical trials. Through them, I discovered what it really means to fight to win. I have also come to understand that sometimes a game never ends but transforms, causing goals to shift that may require an adjustment in strategy.

My mother and I still regularly play games, and we play to win. However, the match is now more balanced and I’ve noticed my mother paying much more attention to my moves and habits and even learning a few things from me.

Superheroes

Legends, lore, and comic books all feature mystical, beautiful beings and superheroes—outspoken powerful Greek goddesses, outspoken Chinese maidens, and outspoken blade-wielding women. As a child, I soared the skies with my angel wings, battled demons with katanas, and helped stop everyday crime (and of course had a hot boyfriend). In short, I wanted to save the world.

But growing up, my definition of superhero shifted. My peers praised people who loudly fought inequality, who rallied and shouted against hatred. As a journalist on a social-justice themed magazine, I spent more time at protests, interviewing and understanding but not quite feeling inspired by their work.

At first, I despaired. Then I realized: I’m not a superhero.

I’m just a 17-year-old girl with a Nikon and a notepad—and I like it that way.

And yet—I want to save the world.

This understanding didn’t arrive as a bright, thundering revelation; it settled in softly on a warm spring night before my 17th birthday, around the fourth hour of crafting my journalism portfolio. I was choosing the best photos I’d taken around town during the 2016 presidential election when I unearthed two shots.

The first was from a peace march—my classmates, rainbows painted on their cheeks and bodies wrapped in American flags. One raised a bullhorn to her mouth, her lips forming a loud O. Months later, I could still hear her voice.

The second was different. The cloudy morning following election night seemed to shroud the school in gloom. In the mist, however—a golden face, with dark hair and two moon-shaped eyes, faces the camera. Her freckles, sprinkled like distant stars across the expanse of her round cheeks, only accentuated her childlike features and added to the soft feel of the photo. Her eyes bore into something beyond the lens, beyond the photographer, beyond the viewer—everything is rigid, from the jut of her jaw, to her stitched brows, her upright spine and arms locked across her chest, to her shut mouth.

I picked the second picture within a heartbeat.

During my career as a photojournalist, I lived for the action shots: the excited gestures of a school board member discussing plans, a rabbi preaching vividly, a group of teenagers chanting and waving flags downtown. To me, the most energetic photos always told the biggest and best stories. They made me feel important for being there, for capturing the superheroes in the moment to share with everyone else. The softer moments paled in comparison, and I thought of them as irrelevant.

It took about one second to tear down one year’s worth of belief.

The idea dawned on me when I was trapped within the distraught weight in the girl’s eyes. Sometimes the moments that speak the loudest aren’t the noisiest or the most energetic. Sometimes they’re quiet, soft, and peaceful.

Now, I still don’t completely understand who I am and who I want to be, but really, who does? I’m not a superhero—but that doesn’t mean I don’t want to save the world. There are just so many ways to do it.

You don’t always have to be loud to inflict change. Sometimes, it begins quietly: a snap of the shutter; a scrape of ink on paper. A breathtaking photograph; an astonishing lede. I’ve noticed the impact creativity can have and how powerful it is to harness it.

So, with that, I make people think and understand those surrounding them. I play devil’s advocate in discussions about ethics and politics. I persuade those around me to think past what they know into the scary territory of what they don’t—so to make people feel. I’m determined to inspire people to think more about how they can be their own superheroes and more.

See, that’s the kind of world-saving I do.

And the Secret Ingredient is

Step 1: Get the ingredients

On the granite countertop in front of me sat a pile of flour, two sticks of butter, and a bowl of shredded beef, just like the YouTube tutorial showed. My mind contorted itself as I tried figuring out what I was doing. Flanking me were two equally discombobulated partners from my Spanish class. Somehow, some way, the amalgamation of ingredients before us would have to be transformed into Peruvian empanadas.

Step 2: Prepare the ingredients

It looked easy enough. Just make a dough, cook the beef until it was tender, put two and two together, and fry them. What YouTube didn’t show was how to season the meat or how long you should cook it. We had to put this puzzle together by ourselves. Adding to the mystery, none of us knew what an empanada should even taste like.

Step 3: Roll out ten equally sized circles of dough

It would be dishonest to say everything went smoothly. I thought the dough should be thick. One team member thought it should be thin. The other thought our circles were squares. A fundamental truth about collaboration is that it’s never uncontentious. Everyone has their own expectations about how things should be done. Everyone wants a project to go their way. Collaboration requires observing the differences between the collaborators and finding a way to synthesize everyone’s contributions into a solution that is mutually agreeable.

Step 4: Cook the beef until tender

Collaborative endeavors are the proving grounds for Murphy’s Law: everything that can go wrong, will go wrong. The shredded beef, which was supposed to be tender, was still hard as a rock after an hour on the stove. With our unseasoned cooking minds, all ideas were valid. Put more salt in? Sure. Cook it at a higher temperature? Go for it. Collaboration requires people to be receptive. It demands an open mind. All ideas deserve consideration.

Step 5: Fry the empanadas until crispy

What does crispy even mean? How crispy is crispy enough; how crispy is too crispy? The back and forth with my teammates over everything from how thick the dough should be to the definition of crispy taught me a key ingredient of teamwork: patience. Collaboration breeds tension, which can make teamwork so frustrating. But it’s that very tension which also transforms differing perspectives into solutions that propel collaborative undertakings forward.

Step 6: Enjoy!

Looking Through a Wider Lens

What does it mean to be an advocate? I didn’t find the answer in any sort of textbook. Not the anatomy textbook that lay across the foot of my bed, filled with Post-Its and half-drawn diagrams. Nor the chemistry textbook that sat on top of it, covered in streaks of blue highlighter. Not even Principles of Biology, overflowing with illegible notes and loose worksheets, had the answer. Yet, in a few years, I will be promising to do just that: be the ultimate advocate for my patients.

My search for the answer began quite unintentionally. When I was initially recommended to serve on the Youth Council my junior year of high school, my perspective on civic engagement was one of apathy and a complete lack of interest. I couldn’t understand how my passion for the medical field had any correlation with serving as a representative for the students at my school and actively engaging within the political sphere. I knew I wanted to pursue a career as a physician, and I was perfectly content embracing the safety net of my introverted textbook world.

But that safety net was ripped wide open the day I walked through the sliding double doors of City Hall for my first Youth Council meeting. I assumed I would spend my hour flipping through flashcards and studying for next week’s unit test, while a bunch of teenagers complained about the lack of donuts in the student store. Instead, I listened to the stories of 18 students, all of whom were using their voices to reshape the distribution of power within their communities and break the structures that chained so many in a perpetual cycle of desperation and despair. While I spent most of my time poring over a textbook trying to memorize formulas and theorems, they were spending their time using those formulas and theorems to make a difference in their communities. Needless to say, that meeting sparked an inspirational flame within me.

The next Youth Council meeting, I asked questions. I gave feedback. I noticed what the students at my school were really struggling with. For the first time, I went to drug prevention assemblies and helped my friends run mental health workshops. The more involved I became in my city’s Youth Council, the more I understood how similar being an advocate for your community is to being an advocate for your patients. When I volunteered at the hospital every week, I started paying attention to more than whether or not my patients wanted ice chips in their water. I learned that Deborah was campaigning for equal opportunity housing in a deeply segregated neighborhood and George was a paramedic who injured his leg carrying an 8-year-old with an allergic reaction to the Emergency Room. I might not have been the doctor who diagnosed them but I was often the one person who saw them as human beings rather than patients.

Youth Council isn’t something most students with a passion in practicing medicine chose to participate in, and it certainly wasn’t something I thought would have such an immense impact on the way I view patient care. As a patient’s ultimate advocate, a physician must look beyond hospital gowns and IV tubes and see the world through the eyes of another. Rather than treat diseases, a physician must choose to treat a person instead, ensuring compassionate care is provided to all. While I know that throughout my academic career I will take countless classes that will teach me everything from stoichiometry to cellular respiration, I refuse to take the knowledge I learn and simply place it on a flashcard to memorize. I will use it to help those whom I must be an advocate for: my patients.